# How Git Works
## I. The history of version control and definition of Version control
Software engineers have been faced with the issue of how best to efficiently and effectively share code since the advent of their profession. Engineers have tried sending code through email or uploading their code to a storage for everyone else to see but this became impractical as code size changes. [SOURCE youtube]In Linus Torvalds’ talk at Google, he talked about how it took a company three days to merge all the code from everyone and how everyone would have to stop working for those three days. Even though this inconvenient method worked, it still came with its drawbacks. For example, once all the code was published, it was tiring to rollback to a previous version if an error was detected. Engineers would have to manually try to find out at what point that error was introduced to the code and then try to change the code back to its previous state if needed. This was obviously inconvenient and led to the creation of version control. [SOURCE git-scm, about version control]Version control is a system that tracks the changes to a file, or set of files over time so it can be rollbacked to a previous version. Version control systems were created and used but eventually they all became commercial and none of them supported free software. [SOURCE anyone]This was a problem for the development of the Linux Operating system because it was a free software and couldn’t afford to pay for version control. 
[SOURCE ??] Fed up with then current systems, the developer of the Linux Kernel, Linus Torvalds, and his team wanted an alternative system to manage their project. Their criteria specified that saving revisions should take no more than three seconds. Furthermore, they took preceding systems such as Concurrent Version System (CVS) as examples of what not to make. Consequently, the control system they would create was designed as a distributed version control architecture. Their solution came to be called Git and has since grown into the most popular version control system amongst professional developers. Git is a version control system (VCS) for managing electronic files and collaboration that is characterized by its distributed revision control. Distributed revision control refers to copying an entire project including the history of all the changed rather than just copying the current version.

## II. Examples of version control systems
The version control systems Concurrent Version System (CVS), Subversion, and Mercurial were all designed to address the same issue of revision management that Git solved. Each system is designed around a unique architecture that offers various advantages and disadvantages to the user.
First released in 1990, CVS is the most matured of the three management systems. The system was modeled around a client to server architecture, meaning that file changes are made on the user’s computer then stored on a central computer server. The centralized design is useful in providing a single source of project revisions that is commonly desirable for professional projects. Additionally, numerous bugs have been resolved through heavy usage over the years, resulting in a highly reliable software. However, the system was not designed with a modern project in mind and has since become antiquated. Regardless, CVS helped pioneer version control technology and served as a predecessor to newer software such as Subversion.
Initially released in 2000, Subversion was designed as a compatible successor to CVS and consequently gained wide acceptance with professional developers. Like CVS, Subversion applied the centralized client-to-server storage technique, providing the same single source benefits as CVS. Unlike its predecessor, Subversion was released as an open source software, meaning that anyone could view, utilize, or contribute to the program. Furthermore, this aspect of the system encourages continuous improvements to be added and gives transparency to its operation. Being a free to use software helped grow the popularity of Subversion among professional developers. In 2018, studies revealed the Subversion is the second most popular version control system among professional developers, behind Git [SOURCE stack-overflow] (Stack Overflow, 2018). 
Released in 2005, Mercurial varied significantly from preceding centralized software architectures such as CVS and Subversion to solve the issue of revision control. Instead of client to single server storage, Mercurial deploys the idea of distributed version control. This alternative design does not rely on a central server to store all the old copies of a file. Rather, the system creates copies of the files locally to store the full history of the project. The file can then be shared and collaborated on with others through third-party applications such as BitBucket or GitHub. The decentralized version control systems currently possess the majority of usage amongst professional developers because of the ability to make changes and keep revision control running while not connected to the centralized server. Git operates under a similar concept to Mercurial. 

## III. Comparison of the internal workings of some popular systems to Git 
Centralized version control systems addressed the majority of early issues that software engineers experienced while sharing or saving code. A central server housed the storage of the version history for each file. Users would maintain the latest version of the file on their computer and could change their local copy to any older version by downloading the information from the central server. 

One downfall of this approach is that in the event of a breakdown of the central server, the entire history of the files would be lost. The only copies remaining would be the current version saved on each user’s computer. Therefore, the restoration of the full file history would be impossible. 

This issue encouraged the development of decentralized systems to offer a solution. With decentralized VCSs, such as Git, each user stores the entire history of the file locally. Consequently, each user’s computer operates similar to the central server in systems such as CVS or Subversion. As a result, the entire project can be restored by any one of the users.

## IV. The snapshot concept
A repository is a folder that is being tracked by Git. Each step in the version history of a repository is called a commit. Most version control systems, such as Subversion, store a file and then the changes between each commit of that file. On the other hand, Git stores an entire snapshot of the repository in each commit. If a file hasn’t changed, Git uses a link to a previous version of that file rather than making an identical copy, to be more efficient. The data can be seen as a stream of snapshots with each snapshot being referenced by a commit. This way, Git can create branches from a snapshot and maintain several versions. The figure below shows an example of four different commits or versions inside a repository. The dashed line boxes indicate a file that has not changed between versions. The black arrows between identical files depicts how Git avoids making duplicate files when no changes are made by referencing back to the original file in the first commit that it appears.

## V. Real-world example of Git versioning stages
Files in a repository have to be selected before they are committed. This way, you can choose what files you want in the commit. Git manages this by having three levels: the working directory, the staging area and the local repository. A file can at one of these levels depending on what the current state of the file is. A file can either be in the untracked, committed, modified, or staged state.

### Working Directory
By default, a new file is in the working directory and not yet part of the git repository. The files in this level are in the untracked state and not yet tracked by Git.
Staging Area
Whenever a file is added to a git repository, it is moved from the working directory to the staging area and is in the staged state. Multiple files can be added to the staging area. 

### Git Repository
The staging area can then be committed, which moves all the files from the staging area to the Git repository. All the previously staged files which were committed are now in the committed state. A new snapshot is created at this point.
Whenever a file that has already been staged is modified, it becomes in the modified state. This file can then be added to staging area and committed again. After the commit, a new snapshot is created, and the file is captured in the new snapshot. 

### Remote Repository
Think of a remote repository as a backup of your git repository that is stored online. When you want to share your repository with others, you upload it to a remote storage. A popular example of this is Github. When you upload your repository, it can be downloaded and viewed by other people. This is generally how people collaborate on a repository - they all have their individual local copies but share a remote version that they can upload to. We will not discuss this because it is out of scope on how git works. In the event that you lose your local copy of your repository, you can always download it from the remote storage. 


